PeerDAS (#1)
hwwhww/consensus-specs: specs/_features/peerdas/das-core.md

        start = blob_index * NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS + column_index
        column.append(DataCell(extended_blob[start:start + column_width]))

    # Compute proofs from blobs
    # The given `block.body.blob_kzg_commitments` should have been verified as `blob_to_kzg_commitment(blob)` results
    kzg_proofs = [
        compute_blob_kzg_proof(blob, block.body.blob_kzg_commitments[blob_index])
        for blob_index, blob in enumerate(blobs)
    ]
    signed_block_header = compute_signed_block_header(signed_block)
    return DataColumnSidecar(
        index=index,
        column=DataColumn(column),
        kzg_commitments=block.body.blob_kzg_commitments,
        kzg_proofs=kzg_proofs,
        signed_block_header=signed_block_header
        kzg_commitment_merkle_proof=compute_merkle_proof(
            block.body,
            get_generalized_index(BeaconBlockBody, 'blob_kzg_commitments'),
        ),
    )
```

## Custody

### Custody requirement

Each node downloads and custodies a minimum of `CUSTODY_REQUIREMENT` rows and `CUSTODY_REQUIREMENT` columns per slot. The particular rows and columns that the node is required to custody are selected pseudo-randomly (more on this below).

> A node *may* choose to custody and serve more than the minimum honesty requirement. Such a node explicitly advertises a number greater than `CUSTODY_REQUIREMENT`  via the peer discovery mechanism -- for example, in their ENR (e.g. `custody_lines: 8` if the node custodies `8` rows and `8` columns each slot) -- up to a maximum of `max(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK, NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS)` (i.e. a super-full node).

Author: @dankrad @djrtwo 

Is it correct that the nodes will reconstruct the data by only querying the columns? i.e., we don’t even need to assign nodes to custody the rows (blobs)?

Reviewer: Doing rows might be a nice-to-have but doesn't seem necessary *at this point*:
1. allow for more "natural" distribution of data to consumers -- e.g. roll-ups -- but honestly, they won't know a priori which row their blob is going to be included in in the block, so they would either need to listen to all rows or download a particular row after seeing the block. The former looks just like listening to column [0, N)  and the latter is req/resp. Not gossip
2. This *can* help with  some sort of distributed reconstruction. Those with full rows can compute extensions and seed missing samples to the network. This would either need to be able to send individual points on the gossip or would need some sort of req/resp faculty (maybe akin to an IHAVEPOINTBITFIELD and IWANTSAMPLE). I believe that for initial pass, just relying on an O(1) honestly assumption for reconstruction is better for simplicity.

So I'd just take it out with a discussion point in FAQ so we can revisit later

Reviewer: And if we keep row custody/distribution, we'll need to make decouple the two numbers because of the assymetry of the data -- can't custody the same number of rows and columns

Author: I made it no row custody and added FAQ with your comment: 9435da3b8d558850e34ab3a90d7188845e21a5f5

Reviewer 2: The rationale sounds great!

- [Custom types](#custom-types)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
  - [Data size](#data-size)
  - [Custody setting](#custody-setting)
  - [Helper functions](#helper-functions)
    - [`LineType`](#linetype)
    - [`get_custody_lines`](#get_custody_lines)
    - [`compute_extended_data`](#compute_extended_data)
    - [`compute_extended_matrix`](#compute_extended_matrix)
    - [`get_data_column_sidecar`](#get_data_column_sidecar)
- [Custody](#custody)
  - [Custody requirement](#custody-requirement)
  - [Public, deterministic selection](#public-deterministic-selection)
- [Peer discovery](#peer-discovery)
- [Entended data](#entended-data)
- [Row/Column gossip](#rowcolumn-gossip)
  - [Parameters](#parameters)
  - [Reconstruction and cross-seeding](#reconstruction-and-cross-seeding)
- [Peer sampling](#peer-sampling)
- [Peer scoring](#peer-scoring)
- [DAS providers](#das-providers)
- [A note on fork choice](#a-note-on-fork-choice)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- /TOC -->

## Custom types

We define the following Python custom types for type hinting and readability:

| Name | SSZ equivalent | Description |
| - | - | - |

> | `DataCell`     | `ByteList[BYTES_PER_BLOB * 2 // NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS]` | The data unit of extended data matrix |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `DataCell`     | `ByteVector[BYTES_PER_BLOB * 2 // NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS]` | The data unit of extended data matrix |
```

| `DataColumn`   | `List[DataCell, MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK]` | The data of each column in PeerDAS |

> | `ExtendedMatrix` | `List[DataCell, MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS]` | The full data with blobs and one-dimension erasure coding extension |

Reviewer 3: is there a reason to prefer the 1D array representation instead of a 2D array representation?

Author: So it can be `List[Vector[DataCell, NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS], MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK]` or `Vector[List[DataCell, MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK], NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS]`.

I'm not sure which one would be more useful in implementation. What do you think?

| `FlattenExtendedMatrix` | `ByteList[MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * BYTES_PER_BLOB * 2]` | The flatten format of `ExtendedMatrix` |
| `LineIndex`    | `uint64` | The index of the rows or columns in `FlattenExtendedMatrix` matrix |

## Configuration

### Data size

| Name | Value | Description |
| - | - | - |
| `NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS` | `uint64(2**4)` (= 32) | Number of columns in the extended data matrix. Invariant: `assert BYTES_PER_BLOB * 2 % NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS == 0` |

### Custody setting

| Name | Value | Description |
| - | - | - |
| `SAMPLES_PER_SLOT` | `70` | Number of random samples a node queries per slot |
| `CUSTODY_REQUIREMENT` | `2` | Minimum number of both rows and columns an honest node custodies and serves samples from |
| `TARGET_NUMBER_OF_PEERS` | `70` | Suggested minimum peer count |

### Helper functions

#### `LineType`

It is implementation-dependent helpers for distinguishing the rows and columns in the following helpers.  

```python
class LineType(enum.Enum):
    ROW = 0
    COLUMN = 1
```

#### `get_custody_lines`

```python
def get_custody_lines(node_id: int, epoch: int, custody_size: int, line_type: LineType) -> list[int]:

>     bound = MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK if line_type else NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS

Reviewer 3: IIUC `LineType.COLUMN` evaluates to `True` so we should have

```suggestion
    bound = NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS if line_type else MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK
```

    all_items = list(range(bound))
    assert custody_size <= len(all_items)
    line_index = (node_id + epoch) % bound
    return [all_items[(line_index + i) % len(all_items)] for i in range(custody_size)]
```

#### `compute_extended_data`

```python
def compute_extended_data(data: Sequence[BLSFieldElement]) -> Sequence[BLSFieldElement]:
    # TODO
    ...
```

#### `compute_extended_matrix`

```python
def compute_extended_matrix(blobs: Sequence[Blob]) -> FlattenExtendedMatrix:
    matrix = bytearray()
    for blob in blobs:

>         matrix.extend(compute_extended_data(blob))

Reviewer 3: do we need to do some conversion to byte array since `compute_extended_data` returns `Sequence[BLSFieldElement]`?

Author: Updated in https://github.com/hwwhww/consensus-specs/pull/1/commits/8d55943d28e01166374de112fbffc5d5058bad5f

    return FlattenExtendedMatrix(matrix)
```

#### `get_data_column_sidecar`

```python

> def get_data_column_sidecar(signed_block: SignedBeaconBlock, blobs: Sequence[blobs]) -> DataColumnSidecar:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
def get_data_column_sidecar(signed_block: SignedBeaconBlock, blobs: Sequence[Blob]) -> DataColumnSidecar:
```

    # Compute `DataColumn` from blobs
    column = []
    column_width = BYTES_PER_BLOB * 2 // NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS
    for blob_index, blob in enumerate(blobs):

>         extended_blob = compute_extended_data(blob)

Reviewer 3: we may need some conversion here based on input type of `compute_extended_data`

Author: updated in https://github.com/hwwhww/consensus-specs/pull/1/commits/8d55943d28e01166374de112fbffc5d5058bad5f

        start = blob_index * NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS + column_index
        column.append(DataCell(extended_blob[start:start + column_width]))

    # Compute proofs from blobs
    # The given `block.body.blob_kzg_commitments` should have been verified as `blob_to_kzg_commitment(blob)` results
    kzg_proofs = [
        compute_blob_kzg_proof(blob, block.body.blob_kzg_commitments[blob_index])
        for blob_index, blob in enumerate(blobs)
    ]
    signed_block_header = compute_signed_block_header(signed_block)
    return DataColumnSidecar(
        index=index,
        column=DataColumn(column),
        kzg_commitments=block.body.blob_kzg_commitments,
        kzg_proofs=kzg_proofs,
        signed_block_header=signed_block_header
        kzg_commitment_merkle_proof=compute_merkle_proof(
            block.body,
            get_generalized_index(BeaconBlockBody, 'blob_kzg_commitments'),
        ),
    )
```

## Custody

### Custody requirement

Each node downloads and custodies a minimum of `CUSTODY_REQUIREMENT` rows and `CUSTODY_REQUIREMENT` columns per slot. The particular rows and columns that the node is required to custody are selected pseudo-randomly (more on this below).

> A node *may* choose to custody and serve more than the minimum honesty requirement. Such a node explicitly advertises a number greater than `CUSTODY_REQUIREMENT`  via the peer discovery mechanism -- for example, in their ENR (e.g. `custody_lines: 8` if the node custodies `8` rows and `8` columns each slot) -- up to a maximum of `max(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK, NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS)` (i.e. a super-full node).

Reviewer 3: do we need separate ENR fields for row and column custody amounts? if the data matrix is not square, for example $64 \times 32$, then how do you interpret a `custody_lines` value of e.g. 48?

I see ways to define custody of rows and columns with a single number even for non-square matrices, but I'm not sure that would be preferable.

Author: changes it to no row custody in https://github.com/hwwhww/consensus-specs/pull/1/commits/9435da3b8d558850e34ab3a90d7188845e21a5f5

A node runs a background peer discovery process, maintaining at least `TARGET_NUMBER_OF_PEERS` of various custody distributions (both custody_size and row/column assignments). The combination of advertised `custody_size` size and public node-id make this readily and publicly accessible.

`TARGET_NUMBER_OF_PEERS` should be tuned upward in the event of failed sampling.

*Note*: while high-capacity and super-full nodes are high value with respect to satisfying sampling requirements, a node should maintain a distribution across node capacities as to not centralize the p2p graph too much (in the extreme becomes hub/spoke) and to distribute sampling load better across all nodes.

*Note*: A DHT-based peer discovery mechanism is expected to be utilized in the above. The beacon-chain network currently utilizes discv5 in a similar method as described for finding peers of particular distributions of attestation subnets. Additional peer discovery methods are valuable to integrate (e.g., latent peer discovery via libp2p gossipsub) to add a defense in breadth against one of the discovery methods being attacked.

> ## Entended data

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Extended data
```

In this construction, we entend the blobs using one-dimension erasure coding extension. The matrix comprises maximum `MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` rows and fixed `NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS` columns, with each row containing a `Blob` and its corresponding extension.

## Row/Column gossip

### Parameters

1. For each row -- use `blob_sidecar_{subnet_id}` subnets, where each blob index maps to the `subnet_id`.

> 2. For each column -- use `data_column_sidecar_{subnet_id}` subnets, where each column index maps to the `subnet_id`. The sidecar can be computed with `get_data_column_sidecar(signed_block: SignedBeaconBlock, blobs: Sequence[blobs])` helper.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. For each column -- use `data_column_sidecar_{subnet_id}` subnets, where each column index maps to the `subnet_id`. The sidecar can be computed with `get_data_column_sidecar(signed_block: SignedBeaconBlock, blobs: Sequence[Blob])` helper.
```

We define the following Python custom types for type hinting and readability:

| Name | SSZ equivalent | Description |
| - | - | - |
| `DataCell`     | `Vector[BLSFieldElement, FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_CELL]` | The data unit of a cell in the extended data matrix |
| `DataColumn`   | `List[DataCell, MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK]` | The data of each column in PeerDAS |
| `ExtendedMatrix` | `List[DataCell, MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS]` | The full data with blobs and one-dimension erasure coding extension |
| `FlattenExtendedMatrix` | `List[BLSFieldElement, MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB * 2 * NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS]` | The flatten format of `ExtendedMatrix` |
| `LineIndex`    | `uint64` | The index of the rows or columns in `FlattenExtendedMatrix` matrix |

## Configuration

### Data size

| Name | Value | Description |
| - | - | - |
| `NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS` | `uint64(2**6)` (= 32) | Number of columns in the extended data matrix. Invariant: `assert FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB * 2 % NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS == 0` |
| `FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_CELL` | `FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB * 2 // NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS` | Elements per `DataCell` |

### Custody setting

| Name | Value | Description |
| - | - | - |

> | `SAMPLES_PER_SLOT` | `70` | Number of random samples a node queries per slot |

Reviewer 4: 70 is too many samples for 1D. For 2D, it roughly corresponds to 30 1D samples. Even 30 is probably too much, especially if the number of columns is so low (32), so that columns are very large. With these symmetric parameters, a column is 256 KBs (like an extended blob), so we really can't afford to sample too many of them

Author: @fradamt 
I changed it to `8` for now (https://github.com/hwwhww/consensus-specs/pull/1/commits/b08e1edd54207ad35f6b38305f97d8258d29a371). We can revisit the parameters later. Maybe add your analysis to the FAQ section?

> | `CUSTODY_REQUIREMENT` | `2` | Minimum number of both rows and columns an honest node custodies and serves samples from |

Reviewer 4: I think we should have an asymmetric custody requirement, with more columns than rows, because downloading more columns adds extra safety guarantees. This is especially important if we decide to go with a fork-choice which uses sampling with a 1 slot lag, i.e., where at slot n we only use the availability on our row and column subnets to determine the availability of blobs from slot n itself, and we only use sampling for blobs from slot <= n-1. In this case it is particularly important that the availability on our custody subnets already has good security properties

Reviewer: Also, I don't think there is a strong argument for row custody/distribution in 1D

https://github.com/hwwhww/consensus-specs/pull/1/files#r1415780113

| `TARGET_NUMBER_OF_PEERS` | `70` | Suggested minimum peer count |

### Helper functions

#### `LineType`

> It is implementation-dependent helpers for distinguishing the rows and columns in the following helpers.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementation-dependent helper for distinguishing the rows and columns in the following helpers.  
```

## Extended data

In this construction, we entend the blobs using one-dimension erasure coding extension. The matrix comprises maximum `MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` rows and fixed `NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS` columns, with each row containing a `Blob` and its corresponding extension.

## Row/Column gossip

### Parameters

1. For each row -- use `blob_sidecar_{subnet_id}` subnets, where each blob index maps to the `subnet_id`.
2. For each column -- use `data_column_sidecar_{subnet_id}` subnets, where each column index maps to the `subnet_id`. The sidecar can be computed with `get_data_column_sidecar(signed_block: SignedBeaconBlock, blobs: Sequence[Blob])` helper.

To custody a particular row or column, a node joins the respective gossip subnet. Verifiable samples from their respective row/column are gossiped on the assigned subnet.

### Reconstruction and cross-seeding

> In the event a node does *not* receive all samples for a given row/column but does receive enough to reconstruct (e.g., 50%+, a function of coding rate), the node should reconstruct locally and send the reconstructed samples on the subnet.

Reviewer: We don't really have the faculty to send individual samples on subnets in this current construction. I would get rid of most of this section and just note that O(1) construction assumption and such nodes can/will send missing columns on missing column subnets and make available on req/resp (and we can fill in the details on this a bit later

Author: Address in https://github.com/hwwhww/consensus-specs/pull/1/commits/0dde8173b0d44337f2965a6df79e80e1b75d41bc

*Note*: There may be anti-DoS and quality-of-service considerations around how to send samples and consider samples -- is each individual sample a message or are they sent in aggregate forms.

## Peer sampling

At each slot, a node makes (locally randomly determined) `SAMPLES_PER_SLOT` queries for samples from their peers via `DataColumnSidecarByRoot` request. A node utilizes `get_custody_lines(..., line_type=LineType.ROW)`/`get_custody_lines(..., line_type=LineType.COLUMN)` to determine which peer(s) to request from. If a node has enough good/honest peers across all rows and columns, this has a high chance of success.

## Peer scoring

Due to the deterministic custody functions, a node knows exactly what a peer should be able to respond to. In the event that a peer does not respond to samples of their custodied rows/columns, a node may downscore or disconnect from a peer.

## DAS providers

A DAS provider is a consistently-available-for-DAS-queries, super-full (or high capacity) node. To the p2p, these look just like other nodes but with high advertised capacity, and they should generally be able to be latently found via normal discovery.

> They can also be found out-of-band and configured into a node to connect to directly and prioritize. For example, some L2 DAO might support 10 super-full nodes as a public good, and nodes could choose to add some set of these to their local configuration to bolster their DAS quality of service.

Reviewer: Remove notes about L2 exmaple

```suggestion
DAS providers can also be found out-of-band and configured into a node to connect to directly and prioritize. Nodes can add some set of these to their local configuration for persistent connection to bolster their DAS quality of service.
```

> Such direct peering utilizes a feature supported out of the box today on all nodes and can complement (and reduce attackability) alternative peer discovery mechanisms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Such direct peering utilizes a feature supported out of the box today on all nodes and can complement (and reduce attackability and increase quality-of-service) alternative peer discovery mechanisms.
```

## A note on fork choice

> The fork choice rule (essentially a DA filter) is *orthogonal to a given DAS design*, other than the efficiency of a particular design impacting it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Fork choice spec TBD, but it will just be a replacement of `is_data_available()` call in Deneb with column sampling instead of full download. Note the `is_data_available(slot_N)` will likely do a `-1` follow distance so that you just need to check the availability of slot `N-1` for slot `N` (starting with the block proposer of `N`).*

The fork choice rule (essentially a DA filter) is *orthogonal to a given DAS design*, other than the efficiency of a particular design impacting it.
```

Author: 👍 merged your comment. We can revisit the `is_data_available` modification later.

In any DAS design, there are probably a few degrees of freedom around timing, acceptability of short-term re-orgs, etc. 

> For example, the fork choice rule might require validators to do successful DAS on slot N to be able to include block of slot `N` in its fork choice. That's the tightest DA filter. But trailing filters are also probably acceptable, knowing that there might be some failures/short re-orgs but that they don't hurt the aggregate security. For example, the rule could be — DAS must be completed for slot N-1 for a child block in N to be included in the fork choice.

Reviewer: Might be better to remove some of this and just sketch what it will be -- deneb fork choice with a modified `is_data_available()` function that does sampling for N-1 -- with a note that starting with block-buildling at N, you must have done DA for N-1 (so it's essentially at the N-1 to N boundary

    return [LineIndex(all_items[(line_index + i) % len(all_items)]) for i in range(custody_size)]
```

#### `compute_extended_data`

```python
def compute_extended_data(data: Sequence[BLSFieldElement]) -> Sequence[BLSFieldElement]:
    # TODO
    ...
```

#### `compute_extended_matrix`

```python
def compute_extended_matrix(blobs: Sequence[Blob]) -> FlattenExtendedMatrix:
    matrix = [compute_extended_data(blob) for blob in blobs]
    return FlattenExtendedMatrix(matrix)
```

#### `compute_samples_and_proofs`

```python
def compute_samples_and_proofs(blob: Blob) -> Tuple[
        Vector[DataCell, NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS * 2],
        Vector[KZGProof, NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS * 2]]:
    """
    Defined in polynomial-commitments-sampling.md
    """
    ...
```

#### `get_data_column_sidecars`

```python
def get_data_column_sidecars(signed_block: SignedBeaconBlock,
                             blobs: Sequence[Blob]) -> Sequence[DataColumnSidecar]:
    signed_block_header = compute_signed_block_header(signed_block)
    block = signed_block.message
    kzg_commitment_merkle_proof = compute_merkle_proof(
        block.body,
        get_generalized_index(BeaconBlockBody, 'blob_kzg_commitments'),

>     ),

Author: ```suggestion
    )
```

`TARGET_NUMBER_OF_PEERS` should be tuned upward in the event of failed sampling.

*Note*: while high-capacity and super-full nodes are high value with respect to satisfying sampling requirements, a node should maintain a distribution across node capacities as to not centralize the p2p graph too much (in the extreme becomes hub/spoke) and to distribute sampling load better across all nodes.

*Note*: A DHT-based peer discovery mechanism is expected to be utilized in the above. The beacon-chain network currently utilizes discv5 in a similar method as described for finding peers of particular distributions of attestation subnets. Additional peer discovery methods are valuable to integrate (e.g., latent peer discovery via libp2p gossipsub) to add a defense in breadth against one of the discovery methods being attacked.

## Extended data

In this construction, we entend the blobs using one-dimension erasure coding extension. The matrix comprises maximum `MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` rows and fixed `NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS` columns, with each row containing a `Blob` and its corresponding extension.

## Column gossip

### Parameters

> For each column -- use `data_column_sidecar_{subnet_id}` subnets, where each column index maps to the `subnet_id`. The sidecars can be computed with `get_data_column_sidecars(signed_block: SignedBeaconBlock, blobs: Sequence[Blob])[]` helper.

Author: ```suggestion
For each column -- use `data_column_sidecar_{subnet_id}` subnets, where each column index maps to the `subnet_id`. The sidecars can be computed with `get_data_column_sidecars(signed_block: SignedBeaconBlock, blobs: Sequence[Blob])` helper.
```

- [Custody](#custody)
  - [Custody requirement](#custody-requirement)
  - [Public, deterministic selection](#public-deterministic-selection)
- [Peer discovery](#peer-discovery)
- [Extended data](#extended-data)
- [Column gossip](#column-gossip)
  - [Parameters](#parameters)
  - [Reconstruction and cross-seeding](#reconstruction-and-cross-seeding)
- [Peer sampling](#peer-sampling)
- [Peer scoring](#peer-scoring)
- [DAS providers](#das-providers)
- [A note on fork choice](#a-note-on-fork-choice)
- [FAQs](#faqs)
  - [Row (blob) custody](#row-blob-custody)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- /TOC -->

## Custom types

We define the following Python custom types for type hinting and readability:

| Name | SSZ equivalent | Description |
| - | - | - |
| `DataCell`     | `Vector[BLSFieldElement, FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_CELL]` | The data unit of a cell in the extended data matrix |
| `DataColumn`   | `List[DataCell, MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK]` | The data of each column in PeerDAS |
| `ExtendedMatrix` | `List[DataCell, MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS]` | The full data with blobs and one-dimension erasure coding extension |

> | `FlattenExtendedMatrix` | `List[BLSFieldElement, MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB * 2 * NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS]` | The flatten format of `ExtendedMatrix` |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `FlattenExtendedMatrix` | `List[BLSFieldElement, FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_CELL * MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS]` | The flatten format of `ExtendedMatrix` |
```

I guess the max size of the flattened should be the same as the max size of `ExtendedMatrix`? `sizeof(DataCell) * MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS` = `sizeof(BLSFieldElement) * FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_CELL * MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS`

Reviewer 2: Why do you multiply by two? I think `NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS` is already the number of extended columns, right?

Reviewer 5: Yes, I think Pop is right here.

Also, it should be `FlattenedExtendedMatrix` or `FlatExtendedMatrix`. I prefer the 2nd one.

| `LineIndex`    | `uint64` | The index of the rows or columns in `FlattenExtendedMatrix` matrix |

## Configuration

### Data size

| Name | Value | Description |
| - | - | - |

> | `NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS` | `uint64(2**6)` (= 32) | Number of columns in the extended data matrix. Invariant: `assert FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB * 2 % NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS == 0` |

Reviewer 5: This assert hides the issue stated earlier and should be removed.

| `SAMPLES_PER_SLOT` | `8` | Number of random samples a node queries per slot |
| `CUSTODY_REQUIREMENT` | `2` | Minimum number columns an honest node custodies and serves samples from |
| `TARGET_NUMBER_OF_PEERS` | `70` | Suggested minimum peer count |

### Helper functions

#### `get_custody_lines`

```python
def get_custody_lines(node_id: NodeID, epoch: Epoch, custody_size: uint64) -> Sequence[LineIndex]:
    assert custody_size <= MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK
    all_items = list(range(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK))
    line_index = (node_id + epoch) % MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK
    return [LineIndex(all_items[(line_index + i) % len(all_items)]) for i in range(custody_size)]
```

#### `compute_extended_data`

```python
def compute_extended_data(data: Sequence[BLSFieldElement]) -> Sequence[BLSFieldElement]:
    # TODO
    ...
```

#### `compute_extended_matrix`

```python
def compute_extended_matrix(blobs: Sequence[Blob]) -> FlattenExtendedMatrix:
    matrix = [compute_extended_data(blob) for blob in blobs]
    return FlattenExtendedMatrix(matrix)
```

#### `compute_samples_and_proofs`

```python
def compute_samples_and_proofs(blob: Blob) -> Tuple[
        Vector[DataCell, NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS * 2],

>         Vector[KZGProof, NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS * 2]]:

Reviewer 2: Why do you need to multiply it by 2? I thought `NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS` is already the number of extended columns.

    """
    Defined in polynomial-commitments-sampling.md
    """
    ...
```

#### `get_data_column_sidecars`

```python
def get_data_column_sidecars(signed_block: SignedBeaconBlock,
                             blobs: Sequence[Blob]) -> Sequence[DataColumnSidecar]:
    signed_block_header = compute_signed_block_header(signed_block)
    block = signed_block.message
    kzg_commitments_inclusion_proof = compute_merkle_proof(
        block.body,
        get_generalized_index(BeaconBlockBody, 'blob_kzg_commitments'),
    )
    cells, proofs = [compute_samples_and_proofs(blob) for blob in blobs]
    sidecars = []
    for column_index in range(NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS):

>         column = DataColumn([cells[0][column_index + MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * i]
>                              for i in range(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK)])
>         kzg_proof_of_column = [proofs[1][column_index + MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * i]
>                                for i in range(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK)]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        column = DataColumn([cells[0][column_index + NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS * i]
                             for i in range(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK)])
        kzg_proof_of_column = [proofs[1][column_index + NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS * i]
                               for i in range(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK)]
```

I guess these should be `NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS` instead, otherwise the maximum possible index would be `NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS - 1 + MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * (MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK - 1)` instead of `NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS - 1 + NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS * (MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK - 1) = NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS * MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK - 1` which is the size of the matrix minus 1.

    - [`compute_samples_and_proofs`](#compute_samples_and_proofs)
    - [`get_data_column_sidecars`](#get_data_column_sidecars)
- [Custody](#custody)
  - [Custody requirement](#custody-requirement)
  - [Public, deterministic selection](#public-deterministic-selection)
- [Peer discovery](#peer-discovery)
- [Extended data](#extended-data)
- [Column gossip](#column-gossip)
  - [Parameters](#parameters)
  - [Reconstruction and cross-seeding](#reconstruction-and-cross-seeding)
- [Peer sampling](#peer-sampling)
- [Peer scoring](#peer-scoring)
- [DAS providers](#das-providers)
- [A note on fork choice](#a-note-on-fork-choice)
- [FAQs](#faqs)
  - [Row (blob) custody](#row-blob-custody)

<!-- END doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- /TOC -->

## Custom types

We define the following Python custom types for type hinting and readability:

| Name | SSZ equivalent | Description |
| - | - | - |
| `DataCell`     | `Vector[BLSFieldElement, FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_CELL]` | The data unit of a cell in the extended data matrix |
| `DataColumn`   | `List[DataCell, MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK]` | The data of each column in PeerDAS |

> | `ExtendedMatrix` | `List[DataCell, MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS]` | The full data with blobs and one-dimension erasure coding extension |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `ExtendedMatrix` | `List[DataCell, MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS]` | The full data with blobs and one-dimensional erasure coding extension |
```

> | `FlatExtendedMatrix` | `List[BLSFieldElement, MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB * NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS]` | The flatten format of `ExtendedMatrix` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `FlatExtendedMatrix` | `List[BLSFieldElement, MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK * FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB * NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS]` | The flattened format of `ExtendedMatrix` |
```

| `LineIndex`    | `uint64` | The index of the rows or columns in `FlatExtendedMatrix` matrix |

## Configuration

### Data size

| Name | Value | Description |
| - | - | - |
| `FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_CELL` | `uint64(2**6)` (= 64)  | Elements per `DataCell` |
| `NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS` | `uint64((FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_BLOB * 2) // FIELD_ELEMENTS_PER_CELL)` (= 128) | Number of columns in the extended data matrix. |

### Custody setting

| Name | Value | Description |
| - | - | - |
| `SAMPLES_PER_SLOT` | `8` | Number of random samples a node queries per slot |

> | `CUSTODY_REQUIREMENT` | `2` | Minimum number columns an honest node custodies and serves samples from |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| `CUSTODY_REQUIREMENT` | `2` | Minimum number of columns an honest node custodies and serves samples from |
```

| `TARGET_NUMBER_OF_PEERS` | `70` | Suggested minimum peer count |

### Helper functions

#### `get_custody_lines`

```python

> def get_custody_lines(node_id: NodeID, epoch: Epoch, custody_size: uint64) -> Sequence[LineIndex]:
>     assert custody_size <= MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK
>     all_items = list(range(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK))
>     line_index = (node_id + epoch) % MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK
>     return [LineIndex(all_items[(line_index + i) % len(all_items)]) for i in range(custody_size)]

Reviewer 4: Should the custody assignment be stable over the blob retrievability period? Maybe for some portion of the assigned columns it could be stable and for others depend on the epoch?

```suggestion
def get_custody_lines(node_id: NodeID, epoch: Epoch, custody_size: uint64) -> Sequence[LineIndex]:
    assert custody_size <= MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK
    all_items = list(range(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK))
    
    line_index = (node_id + epoch // MIN_EPOCHS_FOR_BLOB_SIDECARS_REQUESTS) % MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK
    return [LineIndex(all_items[(line_index + i) % len(all_items)]) for i in range(custody_size)]
```

> def get_custody_lines(node_id: NodeID, epoch: Epoch, custody_size: uint64) -> Sequence[LineIndex]:
>     assert custody_size <= MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK
>     all_items = list(range(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK))
>     line_index = (node_id + epoch) % MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK
>     return [LineIndex(all_items[(line_index + i) % len(all_items)]) for i in range(custody_size)]

Reviewer 4: Should the custody assignment be stable over the blob retrievability period? Maybe for some portion of the assigned columns it could be stable and for others depend on the epoch?

```suggestion
def get_custody_lines(node_id: NodeID, epoch: Epoch, custody_size: uint64) -> Sequence[LineIndex]:
    assert custody_size <= MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK
    all_items = list(range(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK))
    line_index = (node_id + epoch // MIN_EPOCHS_FOR_BLOB_SIDECARS_REQUESTS) % MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK
    return [LineIndex(all_items[(line_index + i) % len(all_items)]) for i in range(custody_size)]
```

Reviewer 2: Why not use `MIN_EPOCHS_FOR_BLOB_SIDECARS_REQUESTS` as defined in Deneb?

Reviewer 4: Ah yeah sorry, I misremembered the name of the parameter.

Author: Removed `epoch` as @djrtwo suggested: https://github.com/hwwhww/consensus-specs/pull/1/commits/f40c75e1721d756ac95e77d68db357e1a4f9daec

```

#### `compute_extended_data`

```python
def compute_extended_data(data: Sequence[BLSFieldElement]) -> Sequence[BLSFieldElement]:
    # TODO
    # pylint: disable=unused-argument
    ...
```

#### `compute_extended_matrix`

```python
def compute_extended_matrix(blobs: Sequence[Blob]) -> FlatExtendedMatrix:
    matrix = [compute_extended_data(blob) for blob in blobs]
    return FlatExtendedMatrix(matrix)
```

#### `compute_samples_and_proofs`

```python
def compute_samples_and_proofs(blob: Blob) -> Tuple[
        Vector[DataCell, NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS],
        Vector[KZGProof, NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS]]:
    """
    Defined in polynomial-commitments-sampling.md
    """
    # pylint: disable=unused-argument
    ...
```

#### `get_data_column_sidecars`

```python
def get_data_column_sidecars(signed_block: SignedBeaconBlock,
                             blobs: Sequence[Blob]) -> Sequence[DataColumnSidecar]:
    signed_block_header = compute_signed_block_header(signed_block)
    block = signed_block.message
    kzg_commitments_inclusion_proof = compute_merkle_proof(
        block.body,
        get_generalized_index(BeaconBlockBody, 'blob_kzg_commitments'),
    )

>     cells, proofs = [compute_samples_and_proofs(blob) for blob in blobs]
>     sidecars = []
>     for column_index in range(NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS):
>         column = DataColumn([cells[0][column_index + NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS * i]
>                              for i in range(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK)])
>         kzg_proof_of_column = [proofs[1][column_index + NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS * i]
>                                for i in range(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK)]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    cells_and_proofs = [compute_samples_and_proofs(blob) for blob in blobs]
    cells = [cells_and_proofs[i][0] for i in range(len(blobs))]
    proofs = [cells_and_proofs[i][1] for i in range(len(blobs))]
    sidecars = []
    for column_index in range(NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS):
        column = DataColumn([cells[blob_index][column_index]
                             for blob_index in range(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK)])
        kzg_proof_of_column = [proofs[blob_index][column_index]
                               for blob_index in range(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK)]
```

>     cells, proofs = [compute_samples_and_proofs(blob) for blob in blobs]
>     sidecars = []
>     for column_index in range(NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS):
>         column = DataColumn([cells[0][column_index + NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS * i]
>                              for i in range(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK)])
>         kzg_proof_of_column = [proofs[1][column_index + NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS * i]
>                                for i in range(MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK)]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    cells_and_proofs = [compute_samples_and_proofs(blob) for blob in blobs]
    cells = [cells_and_proofs[i][0] for i in range(blob_count)]
    proofs = [cells_and_proofs[i][1] for i in range(blob_count)]
    sidecars = []
    blob_count = len(blobs)
    for column_index in range(NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS):
        column = DataColumn([cells[row_index][column_index]
                             for row_index in range(blob_count)])
        kzg_proof_of_column = [proofs[row_index][column_index]
                               for row_index in range(blob_count)]
```

A node runs a background peer discovery process, maintaining at least `TARGET_NUMBER_OF_PEERS` of various custody distributions (both custody_size and column assignments). The combination of advertised `custody_size` size and public node-id make this readily and publicly accessible.

`TARGET_NUMBER_OF_PEERS` should be tuned upward in the event of failed sampling.

*Note*: while high-capacity and super-full nodes are high value with respect to satisfying sampling requirements, a node should maintain a distribution across node capacities as to not centralize the p2p graph too much (in the extreme becomes hub/spoke) and to distribute sampling load better across all nodes.

*Note*: A DHT-based peer discovery mechanism is expected to be utilized in the above. The beacon-chain network currently utilizes discv5 in a similar method as described for finding peers of particular distributions of attestation subnets. Additional peer discovery methods are valuable to integrate (e.g., latent peer discovery via libp2p gossipsub) to add a defense in breadth against one of the discovery methods being attacked.

## Extended data

> In this construction, we entend the blobs using one-dimension erasure coding extension. The matrix comprises maximum `MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` rows and fixed `NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS` columns, with each row containing a `Blob` and its corresponding extension.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this construction, we extend the blobs using a one-dimensional erasure coding extension. The matrix comprises maximum `MAX_BLOBS_PER_BLOCK` rows and fixed `NUMBER_OF_COLUMNS` columns, with each row containing a `Blob` and its corresponding extension.
```
